---
layout: project
type: endeavor
title: Military Deployment
permalink:
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2009-11-24
labels:
  - military
 
summary: I deployed to Afghanistan with Operation Enduring Freedom in 2010.
---

  While enlisted in the US Army I deployed to Afghanistan.  I was assigned to the 173rd Airborne Brigade's 1-503rd Infantry Regiment.  I served in Afghanistan with 1-503rd's battalion scout platoon.  The scout platoon's mission took us all over Afghanistan's Wardak province, which is a rural suburb of Kabul.  Scouts were deployed in order to provide defensive overwatch, counter snipers, identify and eliminate high value targets, prevent the emplacement of improvised explosive devices, setup ambushes and counter ambushes, and even carry-out the occasional 'secret squirrel' mission.  The majority of our missions happened at night, under the cover the darkness.  
  
  As the platoon's medic, I provided all medical support to the platoon and its members during our time there.  While off mission, I worked closely with physicians to provide medical care to emergent patients that had been med-evacced to our outpost; on mission, I typically performed as an infantryman.  However, in the event there was a medical emergency, all command decisions were guided by me.  This was a daunting task as it required not just the delegation of trauma management, but also of medical evacuation procedure, and tactical awareness.  Fortunately, I only had to perform my medical duties on trauma patients a couple dozen times while on-mission; nevertheless, my presence was considered vital.  Due to the training I received in preparation for the deployment, I was the only medic the command felt comfortable sending with the scout platoon.  This came to mean that, by the end of my year there, I participated in over 250 combat missions.  This was likely more than any other individual in the 173rd Airborne's operation space at the time; and nearly twice as much as the rest of the members of my platoon.  This was because we often rotated from night to night, to allow for rest and refit.  As the only medic, this meant I would return from a mission around 1AM, and be ready to step back out with the next team within two hours.  
  
  My year in Afghanistan gave me firsthand life experience that can't be quantified.  I gained experience working with all sorts of people, particularly through language and cultural barriers.  I experienced true conflict, both external and internal.  I experienced the most truly miserable and exhausting times of my life.  I witnessed senseless death, and the emotional fallout that comes with it; I also preserved life and experienced the catharsis of embracing a stranger who I've just informed isn't going to lose their daughter.  All of this required a huge level of perseverence, especially when doing things that I might not agree with personally.  The bigger lesson was in the nature of humanity though - the ways in which we are the same even when there is so much different about us; we all grieve, for instance.  Through my time there, I also learned more about my own personal limits.  As an example - much like a police-officer or infantryman going into a firefight for the first time - a combat medic almost never sees an actual trauma patient prior to it being the real thing, in the field.  The first time I heard the call - "MEDIC! MEDIC!! DOC, GET YOUR ASS OVER HERE!!!" - there was no guarantee I wouldn't freeze in my tracks; and when that day did come, I was relieved to find myself resolute.  The knowledge gained through these experiences, and other much duller sorts that are not mentioned here, cannot be learned in a book.  The sense of self and surrounding that came with it is not one that can be achieved except through trial.  Though these aren't marketable lessons, the values they impressed upon me have helped me be more successful in my life since.
